In this video
Let us learn how cyclic sort works.
As we discussed in the previous video,
in order to apply cyclic sort the array elements
should be in a range. So let us take an array of five
elements from range 1 to 5. The elements are 3 4 5 2 and 1
Here all the elements are in given range of
1 to 5 but they are unsorted
We need to sort all the elements using the
cyclic sort. So the logic here is
Since all the elements are in a given range,
for each index we check
the right element is present there or not
If not, we will swap the element to correct index
For example here the elements are 3 4 5 2 1
here 3's
actual place is array[3-1] which is
array[2]. Element 4's actual place is
arr[4-1] which is array[3]. Similarly
element five's
actual place is array[4] and element 2's actual place is
array[1] and finally 1's actual place is array[0]
If we can place all the elements to their correct
indices, the array will be sorted. So let us
sort the elements in that way.
So initially we have array equal to 3 4 5 2 1
The value of index zero is 3 and 3's actual
index two.
So swap array[0] and array[2] which
is 3 5 now the array will be 5 4 3 2 1
Now we have five in index zero
But index zero is not its place
It's actual place is arr[4]. So swap five and one
Now the array will be 1 4 3 2 5
Now one is in index zero
It is already in its correct place. So we can
skip it and move to the next element
Now in index one, we have four but it's actual
place is array[3]
So swap four and two and now we have placed
all the elements in their correct positions
So the sorted elements are 1 2 3 4 and 5
So this is how the elements are sorted in cyclic sort.
Now let us see implementation of cyclic sort
So let us write a function sort which takes two
arguments the array and its size.
Next declare iterating variable i and initialised it to zero.
So while i less than size we need to find
the actual index of value present in array[i]
Here elements are in between one to n but the
array index starts with zero
So decrement one from array[i] to get
the actual index. so write int index equal to array[i-1]
and check
if array[i] is present in it's correct index
If not, we need to swap the elements
So write if array[i] not equal to array[index]
swap &arr[index], &arr[n]
we need to write the logic for
swap operation here we
Simply use a third variable temp to swap X and Y
So when this function is called elements at index i
and index will be swapped. Otherwise just move to
the next element.
So write else i++ and this process will
be done till i is less than size
So this is all about the cyclic sort
In the next video, we will solve problems using the cyclic sort pattern.